# Working with a PreparedStatement

In Java, you have a choice of working with a Statement, PreparedStatement, or CallableStatement. The latter two are
subinterfaces of Statement.

![](../images/Types-of-statement.png)

Later in the chapter, you learn about using CallableStatement for queries that are inside the database. In this section,
we look at PreparedStatement.

What about Statement, you ask? It is an interface that both PreparedStatement and CallableStatement extend. A Statement
and a PreparedStatement are similar to each other, except that a PreparedStatement takes parameters, while a Statement
does not. A Statement just executes whatever SQL query you give it.

While it is possible to run SQL directly with Statement, you shouldn’t. PreparedStatement is far superior for the
following reasons:

**Performance:**

In most programs, you run similar queries multiple times. When you use PreparedStatement, the database software often
devises a plan to run the query well and remembers it.

**Security:**

You are protected against an attack called SQL injection when using a PreparedStatement correctly.

**Readability:**

It’s nice not to have to deal with string concatenation in building a query string with lots of parameters.

**Future use:**

Even if your query is being run only once or doesn’t have any parameters, you should still use a PreparedStatement. That
way, future editors of the code won’t add a variable and have to remember to change to PreparedStatement then.

## Obtaining a PreparedStatement

To run SQL, you need to tell a PreparedStatement about it. Getting a PreparedStatement from a Connection is easy.

    try (PreparedStatement ps = conn.prepareStatement( "SELECT * FROM exhibits")) {
        // work with ps
    }

An instance of a PreparedStatement represents a SQL statement that you want to run using the Connection. It does not
execute the query yet! We get to that shortly.

Passing a SQL statement when creating the object is mandatory. You might see a trick on the exam.

    try (var ps = conn.prepareStatement()) { // DOES NOT COMPILE }

The previous example does not compile, because SQL is not supplied at the time a PreparedStatement is requested. We also
used var in this example. We write JDBC code both using var and the actual class names to get you used to both
approaches.

## Executing a PreparedStatement

Now that we have a PreparedStatement, we can run the SQL statement. The method for running SQL varies depending on what
kind of SQL statement it is. Remember that you aren’t expected to be able to read SQL, but you do need to know what the
first keyword means.

### Modifying Data with executeUpdate()

Let’s start with statements that change the data in a table. Those are SQL statements that begin with DELETE, INSERT, or
UPDATE. They typically use a method called executeUpdate(). The name is a little tricky because the SQL UPDATE statement
is not the only statement that uses this method.

    var insertSql = "INSERT INTO exhibits VALUES(10, 'Deer', 3)";
    var updateSql = "UPDATE exhibits SET name = '' " + "WHERE name = 'None'";

    var deleteSql = "DELETE FROM exhibits WHERE id = 10";

    try (var ps = conn.prepareStatement(insertSql)) { 
        int result = ps.executeUpdate(); System.out.println(result); // 1
    }

    try (var ps = conn.prepareStatement(updateSql)) { 
        int result = ps.executeUpdate(); System.out.println(result); // 0
    }

    try (var ps = conn.prepareStatement(deleteSql)) { 
        int result = ps.executeUpdate(); System.out.println(result); // 1
    }

For the exam, you don’t need to read SQL. The question will tell you how many rows are affected if you need to know.
Notice how each distinct SQL statement needs its own prepareStatement() call.

### Reading Data with executeQuery()

Next, let’s look at a SQL statement that begins with SELECT. This time, we use the executeQuery() method.

    var sql = "SELECT * FROM exhibits";
    try (var ps = conn.prepareStatement(sql);
        ResultSet rs = ps.executeQuery() ) { // work with rs
    }

Since we are running a query to get a result, the return type is ResultSet. In the next section, we show you how to
process the ResultSet.

### Processing Data with execute()

There’s a third method called execute() that can run either a query or an update. It returns a boolean so that we know
whether there is a ResultSet. That way, we can call the proper method to get more detail. The pattern looks like this:

    boolean isResultSet = ps.execute(); 
    if (isResultSet) {
        try (ResultSet rs = ps.getResultSet()) { 
        System.out.println("ran a query");
    }
    } else {
        int result = ps.getUpdateCount();
        System.out.println("ran an update"); 
    }

If the PreparedStatement refers to sql that is a SELECT, the boolean is true, and we can get the ResultSet. If it is not
a SELECT, we can get the number of rows updated.

### Using the Correct Method

What do you think happens if we use the wrong method for a SQL statement? Let’s take a look:

    var sql = "SELECT * FROM names";
    try (var ps = conn.prepareStatement(sql)) {
        var result = ps.executeUpdate(); 
    }

This throws a SQLException similar to the following:

    Exception in thread "main" java.sql.SQLException: statement does not generate a row count.

We can’t get a compiler error since the SQL is a String. We can get an exception, though, and we do. We also get a
SQLException when using executeQuery() with SQL that changes the database.

    Exception in thread "main" java.sql.SQLException: statement does not generate a result set

### Reviewing PreparedStatement Methods

To review, make sure that you know Table 15.3 and Table 15.4 well. Table 15.3 shows which SQL statements can be run by
each of the three key methods on PreparedStatement. Table 15.4 shows what is returned by each method.

![](../images/SQL-runnable-by-the-execute-method.png)

![](../images/Return-types-of-execute-methods.png)

## Working with Parameters

Suppose our zoo acquires a new elephant and we want to register it in our names table. We’ve already learned enough to
do this.

    public static void register(Connection conn) throws SQLException { 
        var sql = "INSERT INTO names VALUES(6, 1, 'Edith')";
        try (var ps = conn.prepareStatement(sql)) { 
            ps.executeUpdate();
        } 
    }

However, everything is hard-coded. We want to be able to pass in the values as parame- ters. Luckily, a
PreparedStatement allows us to set parameters. Instead of specifying the three values in the SQL, we can use a question
mark (?). A bind variable is a placeholder that lets you specify the actual values at runtime. A bind variable is like a
parameter, and you will see bind variables referenced as both variables and parameters. We can rewrite our SQL statement
using bind variables.

    String sql = "INSERT INTO names VALUES(?, ?, ?)";

Bind variables make the SQL easier to read since you no longer need to use quotes around String values in the SQL. Now
we can pass the parameters to the method itself.

    public static void register(Connection conn, int key, int type, String name) throws SQLException {
    
        String sql = "INSERT INTO names VALUES(?, ?, ?)";
        
        try (PreparedStatement ps = conn.prepareStatement(sql)) {
            ps.setInt(1, key);
            ps.setString(3, name);
            ps.setInt(2, type);
            ps.executeUpdate();
        }
    }

Notice how the bind variables are counted starting with 1 rather than 0. This is really important, so we will repeat it.
Remember that JDBC starts counting columns with 1 rather than 0. A common exam question tests that you know this!

In the previous example, we set the parameters out of order. That’s perfectly fine. The rule is only that they are each
set before the query is executed. Let’s see what happens if you don’t set all the bind variables.

    var sql = "INSERT INTO names VALUES(?, ?, ?)"; 
    try (var ps = conn.prepareStatement(sql)) {
        ps.setInt(1, key);
        ps.setInt(2, type);
        // missing the set for parameter number 3 
        ps.executeUpdate();
    }

The code compiles, and you get a SQLException. The message may vary based on your database driver.

    Exception in thread "main" java.sql.SQLException: Parameter not set

What about if you try to set more values than you have as bind variables?

    var sql = "INSERT INTO names VALUES(?, ?)"; 
    try (var ps = conn.prepareStatement(sql)) {
        ps.setInt(1, key); 
        ps.setInt(2, type); 
        ps.setString(3, name); 
        ps.executeUpdate();
    }

Again, you get a SQLException, this time with a different message. On HyperSQL, that message was as follows:

    Exception in thread "main" java.sql.SQLException: row column count mismatch in statement [INSERT INTO names VALUES(?, ?)]

Table 15.5 shows the methods you need to know for the exam to set bind variables. The ones that you need to know for the
exam are easy to remember since they are called set followed by the name of the type you are setting. There are many
others, like dates, that are out of scope for the exam.

![](../images/PreparedStatement-methods.png)

The first column shows the method name, and the second column shows the type that Java uses. The third column shows the
type name that could be in the database. There is some variation by databases, so check your specific database
documentation. You need to know only the first two columns for the exam.

The setNull() method takes an int parameter representing the column type in the database. You do not need to know these
types. Notice that the setObject() method works with any Java type. If you pass a primitive, it will be autoboxed into a
wrapper type. That means we can rewrite our example as follows:

    String sql = "INSERT INTO names VALUES(?, ?, ?)";
    try (PreparedStatement ps = conn.prepareStatement(sql)) {
        ps.setObject(1, key); 
        ps.setObject(2, type); 
        ps.setObject(3, name); 
        ps.executeUpdate();
    }

Java will handle the type conversion for you. It is still better to call the more specific setter methods since that
will give you a compile-time error if you pass the wrong type instead of a runtime error.

## Updating Multiple Records

Suppose we get two new elephants and want to add both. We can use the same PreparedStatement object.

    var sql = "INSERT INTO names VALUES(?, ?, ?)";
    
    try (var ps = conn.prepareStatement(sql)) {
        ps.setInt(1, 20); 
        ps.setInt(2, 1); 
        ps.setString(3, "Ester"); 
        ps.executeUpdate();
        ps.setInt(1, 21); 
        ps.setString(3, "Elias"); 
        ps.executeUpdate();
    }    

Note that we set all three parameters when adding Ester but only two for Elias. The PreparedStatement is smart enough to
remember the parameters that were already set and retain them. You only have to set the ones that are different.

**Batching Statements**

JDBC supports batching so you can run multiple statements in fewer trips to the database. Often the database is located
on a different machine than the Java code runs on. Saving trips to the database saves time because network calls can be
expensive. For example, if you need to insert 1,000 records into the database, inserting them as a single network call (
as opposed to 1,000 network calls) is usually a lot faster.

You don’t need to know the addBatch() and executeBatch() methods for the exam, but they are useful in practice.

    public static void register(Connection conn, int firstKey, int type, String... names) throws SQLException {
        
        var sql = "INSERT INTO names VALUES(?, ?, ?)"; 
        var nextIndex = firstKey;

        try (var ps = conn.prepareStatement(sql)) {
            ps.setInt(2, type);
            for(var name: names) { 
                ps.setInt(1, nextIndex); 
                ps.setString(3, name); 
                ps.addBatch();nextIndex++; }
                int[] result = ps.executeBatch();
                System.out.println(Arrays.toString(result)); 
            }
        }
    }

Now we call this method with two names:

    register(conn, 100, 1, "Elias", "Ester"); 

The output shows that the array has two elements since there are two different items in the batch. Each added one row in
the database.

    [1, 1]

You can use batching to break up large operations, such as inserting 10 million records in groups of 100. In practice,
it takes a bit of work to determine an appropriate batch size, but the performance of using batch is normally far better
than inserting one row at a time (or all ten million at once).
